{\rtf1\ansi \deff4\deflang1033{\fonttbl{\f4\froman\fcharset0\fprq2 Times New Roman;}{\f5\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2 Arial;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;
\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;
\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\f4\fs20 \snext0 Normal;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\s15 \f4\cf1 \sbasedon0\snext15 Body Text;}{\s16 \f4\cf1 \snext16 Body Single;}{\s17\li288 \f4\cf1 \snext17 Bullet;}{\s18\li576 \f4\cf1 \snext18 
Bullet 1;}{\s19\li720 \f4\cf1 \snext19 Number List;}{\s20\sb72\sa72 \b\i\f4\cf1 \snext20 Subhead;}{\s21\qc\sb144\sa72\keep\keepn \b\f5\fs36\cf1 \sbasedon0\snext21 Title;}{\s22 \f4\cf1 \sbasedon0\snext22 header;}{\s23 \f4\cf1 \sbasedon0\snext23 footer;}{
\s24\fi720 \f4\cf1 \snext24 Footnote;}{\s25\fi720 \f4\cf1 \snext25 $ Footnote;}{\s26\fi720 \f4\cf1 \snext26 # Footnote;}{\s27\fi720 \f4\cf1 \snext27 K Footnote;}{\s28 \f4\cf1 \snext28 Hidden Text;}{\*\cs29 \additive\super \sbasedon10 endnote reference;}
{\*\cs30 \additive\super \sbasedon10 footnote reference;}}{\info{\author Todd Crowe}{\creatim\yr1996\mo1\dy31\hr8\min55}{\version1}{\edmins6}{\nofpages0}{\nofwords0}{\nofchars0}{\vern49203}}\margl1440\margr1440 \ftnbj\aenddoc\hyphcaps0 \fet0\sectd 
\linex0 {\footer \pard\plain \s15 \f4\cf1 
\par 
\par }{\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5
\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain \s15\qc \f4\cf1 {\cs30\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s26\fi720 \f4\cf1 {\cs30\super #}general_info}} {\cs30\super ${\footnote \pard\plain 
\s25\fi720 \f4\cf1 {\cs30\super $}Information}} {\cs30\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s27\fi720 \f4\cf1 {\cs30\super K}DAPIE;Sample;Application}}
\par {\b\fs36 DAPIE Sample Application}
\par \pard \s15 
\par This program is used to demonstrate all of the major steps in {\uldb Porting a Windows Application to OS/2}{\v porting_app}
 using the Developer's API Extentions (DAPIE).  The ported version of the program is also used to illustrate some of the important issues that any developer is likely to encounter if they try to produce a hybrid, {\uldb 
Mixed-mode DAPIE - Native PM Application}{\v mixed_mode}.
\par \page {\cs30\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s26\fi720 \f4\cf1 {\cs30\super #}porting_app}}{\fs32\cf0  }{\cs30\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s25\fi720 \f4\cf1 {\cs30\super $}Porting}}{\fs32\cf0  }{\cs30\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s27\fi720 \f4\cf1 {
\cs30\super K}Porting;Steps}}{\cf0 
\par }\pard \s15\qc {\fs32 Porting a Windows Application to OS/2}
\par \pard \s15 
\par The major steps required to port the sample Windows application to OS/2 using DAPIE are:
\par 
\par \pard\plain \s18\li576 \f4\cf1 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 117 \\f "Wingdings" \\s 12 \\h}{\fldrslt }}Convert the Windows 32-bit resource file {\b sample.rc} to an OS/2 resource file using SMART (SMARTRC).
\par {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 117 \\f "Wingdings" \\s 12 \\h}{\fldrslt }}Convert the Windows help file {\b sample.rtf} to an OS/2 IPF file using SMART (SMARTHLP)
\par {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 117 \\f "Wingdings" \\s 12 \\h}{\fldrslt }}Copy the lines that SMART generated in {\b sample.hhh} to sample.h.
\par {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 117 \\f "Wingdings" \\s 12 \\h}{\fldrslt }}Change the line in sample.c{\b :\line \tab #include <windows.h>\line }to:\line \tab {\b #include <os2win.h>}
\par {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 117 \\f "Wingdings" \\s 12 \\h}{\fldrslt }}Change the code in {\b sample.c} that uses string resource IDs to use MAKEINTRESOURCE with the numeric IDs that SMART generated in {\b sample.hhh}.
\par {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 117 \\f "Wingdings" \\s 12 \\h}{\fldrslt }}Create a DEF file for the executable {\b sample.exe.}
\par {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 117 \\f "Wingdings" \\s 12 \\h}{\fldrslt }}Create a new {\b makefile} the project.
\par \pard\plain \s15 \f4\cf1 
\par \pard \s15\qc \page {\cs30\super #{\footnote \pard\plain \s26\fi720 \f4\cf1 {\cs30\super #}mixed_mode}} {\cs30\super ${\footnote \pard\plain \s25\fi720 \f4\cf1 {\cs30\super $}Mixed-mode Applications}} {\cs30\super K{\footnote \pard\plain \s27\fi720 
\f4\cf1 {\cs30\super K}Mixed-mode;Native;PM}}
\par {\fs32 Issues Involved in Creating a Mixed-mode DAPIE Application}
\par 
\par \pard \s15 There are several major issues a developer must keep in mind when producing a mixed-mode DAPIE - native PM application:
\par 
\par \pard\plain \s18\li576 \f4\cf1 {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 117 \\f "Wingdings" \\s 12 \\h}{\fldrslt }}PM native code should be kept in separate source files from DAPIE code.
\par {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 117 \\f "Wingdings" \\s 12 \\h}{\fldrslt }}The window handle of a top-level DAPIE window is actually a frame window handle.
\par {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 117 \\f "Wingdings" \\s 12 \\h}{\fldrslt }}Every top-level DAPIE window has a client window that is transparent to DAPIE APIs; this includes dialogs.
\par {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 117 \\f "Wingdings" \\s 12 \\h}{\fldrslt }}DAPIE and PM window handles are generally interchangeable.
\par {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 117 \\f "Wingdings" \\s 12 \\h}{\fldrslt }}DAPIE HDCs should not be used with Gpi calls and PM HPSs and HDCs should not be used with DAPIE APIs.
\par {\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 117 \\f "Wingdings" \\s 12 \\h}{\fldrslt }}DAPIE kernel handles are not compatible with OS/2 base handles (e.g. file handles).
\par }